 Abstract – The objective of the crop rotation planning 
problem addressed in this paper is to maximize the total net 
return. An integer linear programming model is formulated 
which optimizes the crop rotation plans using the branch and 
bound algorithm. The model considers the maximum 
allowable frequency for planting each crop during the 
rotation cycle in each plot. The proposed model incorporates 
a novel timing preference constraint, along with the 
agronomic, 
water 
availability 
and 
seasonal 
demand 
restrictions. 
An 
analysis 
has 
been 
performed 
to 
simultaneously visualize the temporal and spatial variations 
during the rotation cycle.
Keywords - Agricultural production planning, Crop 
Rotation Planning, Integer Programming 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The agri-food supply chain problem is facing major 
challenges in satisfying global demand and preserving 
natural resources. It includes many activities starting from 
planting the planned crops, moving to the harvesting at the 
correct timing until delivering the final fresh/processed 
products to the customers. The problem could be divided 
into cropping (i.e. farming decisions), transportation and 
processing of the targeted crop.  
 
Recent reviews of the agri-food supply chain could be 
found in [1, 2]. Cropping decisions include: deciding on the 
allocated area to each crop, timing of planting and 
harvesting, and the utilization of the available resources for 
planting the crops. Improper crop planning affects the agri-
food supply chain activities; hence, farming decisions play 
a crucial role in shaping the whole agri-chain. Dury et al.
[3] classified the farming decisions into crop planning and 
crop rotation, where this paper tackles the latter one.  
 
Crop rotation is defined as the cyclic pattern of 
planting different crops in the same plot. It increases the 
organic matter, nitrogen and soil properties, and hence it 
preserves the soil quality and increase yields [4]. It helps in 
regulating the irrigation water, reducing diseases and 
agricultural pests, as well as minimizing the use of 
synthetic fertilizers and pesticides. The highest profitable 
crop during the rotation cycle is called “the main crop”. 
The rotation length is defined by replanting the main crop 
in the plot, and the cycle is usually named for the main 
crop. For example, the wheat rotation cycle in Egypt 
extends for three years with two crops harvested per year.  
 
In the analysis of the strategic crop rotation planning 
problem, the main objective is to select the optimum crop 
rotation plans. The determination of the optimum sequence 
and schedule while optimizing single or multiple 
objectives is a challenging task, where a set of pre-defined 
constraints should be considered. The limitations include 
the availability of resources (e.g. water, and cultivated 
area), and the production time of each crop [5]. Crop 
rotation planning problem is an NP-hard optimization 
problem. It involves both sequencing and resource 
allocation to find the allocations of the restricted number 
of agriculture plots optimally amongst the various crops 
each season.  For example, Fig.1 shows a schematic layout 
for the crops’ succession problem, wherein each season 
several crops could be planted in the available plots. The 
planted crops will affect the decision of which crop to 
cultivate in the next season. This structure makes the crop 
rotation schedules, a complex combinatorial task with 
many decision variables and constraints. 
 
The objective of this article is to examine the crop 
rotation problem by formulating an integer linear 
programming model, in order to support the farmer’s 
decision in determining the optimal crop distribution 
across the plots. In section II, some related works for the 
problem are addressed. The problem description is 
presented in section III, and the proposed mathematical 
model for the crop rotation problem is derived in section 
IV. Section V presents the primary computational results 
and finally, Section VI gives the conclusions and future 
work. 
II.  LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
The recent research on the crop rotation planning 
problem was motivated by the work of Detlefsen and 
Jensen [6] who used a simple network model to describe 
the problem. Many analytical and computational models 
have been proposed for solving the crop rotation problem, 
which can be divided into two main areas: economics and 
agronomy. The general objective of the current work is 
generating an optimal performance related to economic 
decisions, where agronomic constraints should be 
respected. A recent review that covered the mathematical 
models of crop planning were presented in [7].
 
Dos Santos et al. [8] developed a binary optimization 
model for vegetable farming, intending to determine the 
crop rotation schedules for multiple plots with adjacency 
constraints. Also, the model considers the planting of 
legume crops and fallow periods for each plot during each 
rotation. The model was solved by means of a heuristic 
based on column generation, and
A New Mathematical Model for the Deterministic Crop Rotation Planning 
Problem
I. Fikry1, Mohamed Gheith1,2, Amr Eltawil1
1Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, Egypt-Japan University for Science and Technology, 
Alexandria, Egypt
2On leave from Production Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt
(Ibrahim.fikry@ejust.edu.eg)
314
978-1-7281-3804-6/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE314
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:47:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the crop rotation problem
compared to the default branch-and-cut approach of 
CPLEX. Dos Santos et al. [9] have extended their original 
model to take into account the effects of production 
constraints, and the heterogeneity of each available plot. 
Although they used the same solution approach with plot 
size as a decision variable, two additional heuristics were
added to refine the obtained results. The first one (the plot 
elimination heuristic) guarantees that tiny plot sizes are 
eliminated, while the second one (the plot-minimization) 
ensures that demand is met with the minimum number of 
plots. Similarly, Dos Santos et al. [10] developed a Branch-
and-Price-and-Cut (BPC) algorithm that involves many 
improved features to optimally solve the master crop 
rotation problem.  
 
Another BPC algorithm for the crop rotation planning 
problem was proposed adapting restricted branching rules 
[11]. Their original model involved a binary crop rotation 
planning model, with an objective of minimizing the 
needed area during the time horizon and covering the 
seasonal demand [12]. On the other hand, the stochastic 
nature of agriculture systems was handled in [13], where a 
dynamic stochastic programming model is presented to 
investigate the risks associated with production. The model 
showed that higher risks in the crop’s yield and prices 
occurred in the presence of longer rotations; hence, longer 
crop rotations are unfavourable to farmers.  
 
A linear programming model called CropRota, 
generates typical crop rotations with the percentage share 
of crops in rotation as the decision variables [14]. The 
model derives the crop rotations by using an agronomic 
score matrix and compares the obtained results with the 
observed crop data from the Austrian region. A four-year 
crop rotation schedule was developed using a MILP model 
for an organic farm in Pennsylvania [15]. The developed 
model considers crop yield requirements, required 
harvested quantity, irrigation type, weed control, and other 
rotation principles.  
III.  PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 
 
Since 1987, the Egyptian farmers were freely choosing 
the crops to plant, and the area allocated to each crop. As a 
result, the farmers took the decisions to plant the most 
profitable crops (e.g. wheat, maize, rice) regardless of the 
negative consequences. The consequent negative effects 
involve excessive use of water due to the expansion of the 
annual rice area and the decline of soil fertility and 
properties due to mono-cropping. The main objective of 
this work is to utilize the crop rotation concepts and 
achieve a reasonable income for the farmer while 
respecting the agronomic constraints. The optimal crop 
rotation plan should contain the following conditions:  
x
Each crop has its own production time, planting 
dates, deterministic demand, and the total 
expected profit of selling the harvested quantity. 
x
Different crop species require varying amounts of 
water for irrigation. 
x
Each Crop belongs to a known family. Crops from 
the same family have succession constraints 
(cannot be planted in succession). The crop 
cannot be repeated yearly in the same land, and it 
is controlled by the crop frequency.  
x
Every cycle contains a legume crop (e.g. beans 
and soybeans), which affects the soil contents 
positively and hence, the crop’s productivity [16].
x
One or more fallow periods should be allowed to 
restore the soil’s moisture and fertility content. 
x
Design the rotation in a way that achieves a 
reasonable profit by allocating a sufficient area for 
the main cash crop. 
 
Based on the above-discussed conditions, the 
generation of optimal crop rotation schedules while 
targeting the highest income from the suggested rotations 
is a hard-combinatorial optimization task. In this paper, an 
integer linear programming model is formulated for the 
crop rotation planning problem. Fig.2 provides an initial 
base that shapes the decision-making problem and 
identifies the nature of factors involved in the cropping-
plan decision-making process. The proposed mathematical 
model can facilitate taking the decisions related to defining 
the crops sequence in each plot within the time horizon, 
estimating the needed area for each crop to satisfy the 
seasonal demand, and obtaining an operational plan for 
different agricultural activities during the rotation cycle. To 
the best of our knowledge, no previous study has 
considered the maximum frequency of planting the desired 
crop within the rotation cycle, while considering the 
necessary conditions (e.g. water, demand) to implement the 
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE IEEM
315
978-1-7281-3804-6/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE315
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:47:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
proper rotation schedules successfully. This study 
integrates all the required economic and agronomic 
constraints through a binary crop rotation model.  
Fig. 2. The analytical framework for the crop rotation problem. 
IV.
 THE PROPOSED MODEL 
a.
The Model Assumptions 
x
There is no limitation on the seasonal demand of 
crops. 
x
The field consists of homogenous plots with 
standard sizes; hence the obtained yield for the 
desired crop is the same regardless of the plot used 
to plant that crop. 
x
The expected crop yield and irrigation water do 
not depend on the preceding crop, but on the 
present crop. Both values are known and 
deterministic.
x
The size of each plot equals to one feddan, which 
is subdivided according to the rotation cycle. 
b.
Model Nomenclature 
SETS AND INDICES
ܥݎ݋݌ݏ= {1, . . . . . . ܫ , ܫ+ 1 . . . . . . ܯ , ܯ+ 1}, is the set of 
crops including legumes and fallow. Where {1, … ܫ} are 
the crops, {ܫ+ 1, … ܯ} are the legumes, and ܯ+ 1 is the 
fallow (i.e. unplanted period). 
݅ is the index over the set of ܿݎ݋݌ݏ
ܨ݈ܽ݉݅݅݁ݏ= {1, . . . . . . ܨ}, is the set of crop families 
݂ is the index over the set of ܨ݈ܽ݉݅݅݁ݏ
ܶ݅݉݁ ݌݁ݎ݅݋݀ݏ= {1, . . . . . . ܬ}, is the set of time periods 
݆ is the index over the set of ܶ݅݉݁ ݌݁ݎ݅݋݀ݏ
ܻ݁ܽݎݏ= {1, . . ܶ}, is the set of years in the rotation cycle 
݈ܲ݋ݐݏ= {1, . . ܮ}, is the set of Plots 
݈ is the index over the set of ݈ܲ݋ݐݏ
PARAMETERS
ܥ௜  
The net return of crop ݅per plot 
ݏ௜     Starting period of the planting of crop ݅
ݐ௜
Required production time of crop ݅
ܧ௜
Ending period of harvesting of crop ݅
ܻ௜
Yield of crop ݅
ܦ௜
Demand for crop ݅
ܤ௜    Maximum number of plots assigned to crop ݅
during the rotation cycle
ܹ௜   Required water for irrigating crop ݅
ܣܹTotal available water during the rotation cycle
݂௜  
Frequency of crop ݅
N௜    Frequency modification factor for crop ݅
ܶ
Rotation cycle in years
ܨ௜  
The reciprocal of frequency of crop ݅
ܻ
Total yearly time slots
DECISION VARIABLES
ܺ௜௝௟ቄ1  ݂݅ ܿݎ݋݌ ݅ is ݌݈ܽ݊ݐ݁݀ ݅݊ ݌݁ݎ݅݋݀ ݆ ݅݊ ݌݈݋ݐ ݈
0  ݋ݐℎ݁ݎݓ݅ݏ݁
c.
The Mathematical Model 
݉ܽݔ  ෍෍෍ܥ௜. ܺ௜௝௟
௅
௟ୀଵ
௃
௝ୀଵ
 ூ
௜ୀଵ
(1)
෍ܺ௜௝௟
ெାଵ
௜ୀଵ
 ≤ 1             ∀ ݆∈ܬ  ∀ ݈∈ܮ
(2)
ܺ௜௝௟+ ෍෍ܺ௜(௝ା௧೔)௟
௜∈௙
௧೔∈௜
≤1 
∀ ݈∈ܮ         ∀ ݆∈ܬ      ∀ ݅∈ܨ
(3)
෍ܺ௜௝௟
ா೔
௝ୀ௦೔
 =  ݐ௜ܺ௜(௝ୀ௦೔)௟ 
∀ ݅∈ܫ/ܯ+ 1     ∀ ݈∈ܮ     ∀ ݏ௜, ܧ௜∈ ܶ
(4)
෍  
෍
ܺ௜௝௟
௝∈௃/{௦೔,..,ா೔}
௅
௟ୀଵ
= 0         ∀ ݅∈ܫ           
(5)
෍෍ܺ௜௝௟
௃
௝ୀଵ
௅
௟ୀଵ
 ≤ܤ௜             
∀ ݅∈I/(I + 1 … … . M, M + 1)      
(6)
෍෍ܺ௜௝௟
ெ
ூାଵ
௃
௝ୀଵ
≥ 1                 ∀ ݈∈L
(7)
෍ܺ(ெାଵ)௝௟
௃
௝ୀଵ
≥ 1               ∀ ݈∈L
(8)
෍෍෍ܹ௜. ܺ௜௝௟
ெ
௜ୀଵ
௃
௝ୀଵ
௅
௟ୀଵ
 ≤ܣܹ
(9)
෍ܺ௜௝௟
௝∈௦೔
≤݂௜ܶ+ ܰ௜      ∀ ݅∈ܫ         ∀ ݆∈ܬ 
(10)
෍ܺ௜(௦೔ା(௝ିଵ)௒)௟
ி೔
௝ୀଵ
 ≤ 1             ∀ ݅∈ܫ  ∀ ݈∈ܮ
(11)
ܺ௜௝௟ ∈ {0,1}      ∀ ݅∈I         ∀ ݆∈J          ∀ ݈∈L
(12)
Land constraints 
Water availability 
Crop rotation 
constraints   
Economic and 
Ergonomic 
data 
Problem 
formulation
Economic 
optimization 
model
Optimal 
cropping 
sequence, 
rotation and
maximum net 
return
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE IEEM
316
978-1-7281-3804-6/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE316
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:47:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(a)
Periods from 1 to 40 
(b)
Periods from 41 to 72 
Fig. 3. Crop production schedule throughout the planning horizon for all plots.
 
The objective function (1) maximizes the total profit 
from selling the crops which grow during the rotation 
cycle. Constraint (2) assigns at most one crop per plot per 
period, while constraint (3) prevents the same crop or two 
crops from the same family to be planted consecutively. 
Constraint (4) ensures that the planted crop will occupy the 
plot during its production cycle. Constraint (5) guarantees 
that each crop is only grown in its planting period. 
Constraint (6) represents the required number of plots for 
each crop to satisfy the seasonal demand during the rotation 
cycle. Constraints (7) and (8) adopt the presence of at least 
single green manure crop and fallow for each plot during
the rotation cycle, respectively. Constraint (9) limits the 
used water for irrigation to the total available amount of 
water. Constraint (10) ensures that the occurrence of each 
crop will be defined according to the crop’s frequency 
during the rotation cycle. Constraint (11) ensures that there 
is enough time before planting the same crop again. It is 
worth noting that constraint (10) will be enough to 
represent the crops’ frequencies without introducing 
constraint (12) in case that the rotation length is less than 
or equal to the frequency reciprocal of the crops [17].
Finally, the binary decision variable ܺ௜௝௟ is equal to one if 
and only if crop ݅ is planted in period ݆ in plot ݈. 
 
The potential contribution of the formulated model is 
the integration of crops sequence with spatial and temporal 
variations, while considering the agronomic constraints. 
The model produces the crops sequence and the area 
allocated for each crop simultaneously using a single 
model. 
V.
MODEL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS  
 
In this section, the solution of the proposed binary 
linear programming model is discussed, and the 
computational analysis is conducted to maximize the 
accumulated net return at the end of the rotation cycle. The 
model was implemented using GUROBI 8.1 and tested on 
a 2.20 GHz Core i7 with 6 GB RAM computer. The solver 
uses the branch and bound algorithm to find the optimal 
rotation schedules. The study selected thirty-one crops 
related to eleven families from old lands in Egypt. Crop 
data1 involves planting and harvesting dates, average crop 
water requirement, and total net return. A rotation cycle 
length of three years is divided into weeks ( J =72), three 
sets of plots ( L = 6,12,18), were used during the 
computational analysis. The full optimization model 
                                                          
1 Data is available upon request due to limit paper space. 
consists of 78,112 variables with 11,074 linear constraints 
and could be solved in less than one second. 
 
The verification of the proposed model is done by 
setting L =12 with no restrictions on demand; hence, the 
model should allocate the most profitable crop in all plots. 
Fig.3 shows the obtained schedule in that case, where the 
cash crop (i.e. tomatoes) is planted to get the highest profit. 
The optimal schedule consists of one legume crop 
(soybeans), fallow periods to utilize the crop rotation 
concepts and restrictions on repeating the cash crop due to 
the frequency limitation. 
Fig.4 demonstrates how the use of different amounts 
of water alter the range of obtained profit for the three sets 
of plots. With small amounts of water, the different number 
of plots have the same earned benefit as a result of low 
utilizing of the available area regardless of the owned 
number of plots until reaching approximately ten thousand
cubic meters. At this point, larger number of plots will 
continue in gaining a similar profit until a certain water 
level is used and so on for large-size farms. As indicated in 
Fig. 4, each set has a shaded area for maximum profit, 
which cannot be exceeded at a certain amount of irrigation 
water. Consequently, the projected area represents the 
maximum allowable profit that the farmer can obtain when 
utilizing the rotation methodology. Each curve reaches a 
constant rate corresponding to the optimum required water 
for irrigation (e.g. optimum needed water for eighteen plots 
approximately equals to 405 thousand cubic meters). Table 
1 summarizes the optimum water amounts and objective 
values for the different number of plots. 
TABLE I  
PROFIT AND IRRIGATION REQUIREMENTS BY THE PROPOSED MODEL 
Plots
Water Requirements
        (103 m3)
Obj. Value 
(Egyptian Pounds)
6
135
451,614
12
270
903,228
18
405
1,354,842
24
540
1,806,456
30
675
2,258,070
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40
Plot
Tomatoes(S)
Eggplant
soybeans
Tomatoes(W)
41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72
Plot
Clover (long-cut)
Eggplant
Clover (short-cut)
Watermelon
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE IEEM
317
978-1-7281-3804-6/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE317
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:47:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 4. Expected profit for each set of plots at different water amount 
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The planning of crop rotation is used in maximizing 
the farmer’s profit by determining the optimum crops’ 
schedules. In this paper, a binary linear programming 
model capable of solving optimally the crop rotation 
planning problem is proposed. The combinatorial aspect 
arises as a result of the ecological criteria that must be 
respected in the crop rotation. These criteria include certain 
production dates for crops, restriction on growing specific 
crops in succession and enhancing soil ability by legumes 
and fallows. The planted areas are considered an essential 
parameter in investigating the crop rotation problems, 
while achieving the efficient utilization of available water 
resources. In this study, we have demonstrated the trade-
offs between irrigation water and expected total profit. Two 
important factors should be included in future work in 
order to obtain more relevant results. First, an extension of 
the model to include soil properties, deficit irrigation and 
resource constraints such as used machinery and available 
workforce. Second, incorporating risk assessment with its 
impact on the optimal crop selection. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project was supported by the Egyptian 
ministry of higher education grant and the Japanese 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) in the scope of 
the Egypt-Japan University of Science and Technology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. D. Kusumastuti, D. P. Van Donk, and R. Teunter, 
"Crop-related harvesting and processing planning: a 
review," 
International 
Journal 
of 
Production 
Economics, vol. 174, pp. 76-92, 2016. 
[2] 
O. Ahumada and J. R. Villalobos, "Application of 
planning models in the agri-food supply chain: A 
review," European journal of Operational research, 
vol. 196, no. 1, pp. 1-20, 2009. 
[3] 
J. Dury, N. Schaller, F. Garcia, A. Reynaud, and J. E. 
Bergez, "Models to support cropping plan and crop 
rotation 
decisions. 
A 
review," 
Agronomy 
for 
sustainable development, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 567-580, 
2012. 
[4] 
S. Dogliotti, W. A. Rossing, and M. K. Van Ittersum, 
"Systematic design and evaluation of crop rotations 
enhancing soil conservation, soil fertility and farm 
income: a case study for vegetable farms in South 
Uruguay," Agricultural Systems, vol. 80, no. 3, pp. 277-
302, 2004. 
[5] 
N. M. Cid-Garcia, A. G. Bravo-Lozano, and Y. A. Rios-
Solis, "A crop planning and real-time irrigation method 
based on site-specific management zones and linear 
programming," 
Computers 
and 
Electronics 
in 
Agriculture, vol. 107, pp. 20-28, 2014. 
[6] 
N. K. Detlefsen and A. L. Jensen, "Modelling optimal 
crop sequences using network flows," Agricultural 
Systems, vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 566-572, 2007. 
[7] 
 W. Gomaa, N. Harraz, and A. ElTawil, "Crop planning 
and water management: A survey," in Proceedings of 
The 41st International Conference on Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, 2011.  
[8] 
L. M. R. dos Santos, P. Michelon, M. N. Arenales, and 
R. H. S. Santos, "Crop rotation scheduling with 
adjacency constraints," Annals of Operations Research, 
vol. 190, no. 1, pp. 165-180, 2011. 
[9] 
L. M. R. dos Santos, A. M. Costa, M. N. Arenales, and 
R. H. S. Santos, "Sustainable vegetable crop supply 
problem," European Journal of Operational Research, 
vol. 204, no. 3, pp. 639-647, 2010. 
[10] 
L. M. R. dos Santos, P. Munari, A. M. Costa, and R. H. 
Santos, "A branch-price-and-cut method for the 
vegetable crop rotation scheduling problem with 
minimal plot sizes," European Journal of Operational 
Research, vol. 245, no. 2, pp. 581-590, 2015. 
[11] 
L. Alfandari, A. Plateau, and X. Schepler, "A branch-
and-price-and-cut approach for sustainable crop 
rotation planning," European Journal of Operational 
Research, vol. 241, no. 3, pp. 872-879, 2015. 
[12] 
L. Alfandari, J.-L. Lemalade, A. Nagih, and G. Plateau, 
"A MIP flow model for crop-rotation planning in a 
context of forest sustainable development," Annals of 
Operations Research, vol. 190, no. 1, pp. 149-164, 
2011. 
[13] 
A. Ridier, K. Chaib, and C. Roussy, "A Dynamic 
Stochastic Programming model of crop rotation choice 
to test the adoption of long rotation under price and 
production risks," European Journal of Operational 
Research, vol. 252, no. 1, pp. 270-279, 2016. 
[14] 
M. Schönhart, E. Schmid, and U. A. Schneider, 
"CropRota–A crop rotation model to support integrated 
land use assessments," European Journal of Agronomy, 
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 263-277, 2011. 
[15] 
R. J. Forrester and M. Rodriguez, "An Integer 
Programming Approach to Crop Rotation Planning at 
an Organic Farm," The UMAP Journal, vol. 38, no. 4, 
pp. 5-25, 2018. 
[16] 
M. Reckling et al., "A cropping system assessment 
framework—evaluating effects of introducing legumes 
into crop rotations," European Journal of Agronomy, 
vol. 76, pp. 186-197, 2016. 
[17] 
S. Dogliotti, W. Rossing, and M. Van Ittersum, 
"ROTAT, a tool for systematically generating crop 
rotations," European Journal of Agronomy, vol. 19, no. 
2, pp. 239-250, 2003. 
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE IEEM
318
978-1-7281-3804-6/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE318
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:47:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
