Citation: Zverev, A.O.; Kurchak,
O.N.; Orlova, O.V.; Onishchuk, O.P.;
Kichko, A.A.; Eregin, A.V.; Naliukhin,
A.N.; Pinaev, A.G.; Andronov, E.E.
Dynamic of the Soil Microbiota in
Short-Term Crop Rotation. Life 2023,
13, 400. https://doi.org/10.3390/
life13020400
Academic Editor: Don A. Cowan
Received: 15 November 2022
Revised: 27 December 2022
Accepted: 6 January 2023
Published: 1 February 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
life
Communication
Dynamic of the Soil Microbiota in Short-Term Crop Rotation
Aleksei O. Zverev 1,2,*
, Oksana N. Kurchak 1, Olga V. Orlova 1, Olga P. Onishchuk 1, Arina A. Kichko 1
,
Aleksander V. Eregin 3, Aleksey N. Naliukhin 4
, Aleksandr G. Pinaev 1 and Evgeny E. Andronov 1,2
1
All-Russian Research Institute for Agricultural Microbiology (ARRIAM), 3 Podbelsky Chaussee,
St. Petersburg 196608, Russia
2
V.V. Dokuchaev Soil Science Institute, 7 Building 2, Pyzhyovskiy Lane, Moscow 119017, Russia
3
N.V. Vereshchagin Vologda State Dairy Farming Academy, 2 Shmidta Street,
Molochnoye, Vologda 160555, Russia
4
Timiryazev Moscow Agricultural Academy, Russian State Agrarian University, 6 Pryanishnikova,
Moscow 127434, Russia
*
Correspondence: azver.bio@gmail.com
Abstract: Crop rotation is one of the oldest and most effective methods of restoring soil fertility,
which declines when the same plant is grown repeatedly. One of the reasons for a reduction in fertility
is the accumulation of pathogenic and unfavorable microbiota. The modern crop rotation schemes (a
set of plant species and their order in the crop rotation) are highly effective but are designed without
considering soil microbiota dynamics. The main goal of this study was to perform a short-term
experiment with multiple plant combinations to access the microbiological effects of crop rotation. It
could be useful for the design of long-term crop rotation schemes that take the microbiological effects
of the crop rotation into account. For the analysis, ﬁve plants (legumes: vetch, clover, and cereals:
oats, wheat, and barley) were used. These ﬁve plants were separately grown in pots with soil. After
the ﬁrst phase of vegetation, the plants were removed from the soil and a new crop was planted.
Soil samples from all 25 possible combinations of primary and secondary crops were investigated
using v4-16S rDNA gene sequencing. It was shown that the short-term experiments (up to 40 days
of growing) are effective enough to ﬁnd microbial shifts in bulk soil from different plants. Both
primary and secondary cultures are signiﬁcant factors for the microbial composition of microbial soil
communities. Changes are the most signiﬁcant in the microbial communities of vetch soils, especially
in the case of vetch monoculture. Growing clover also leads to changes in microbiota, especially
according to beta-diversity. Data obtained can be used to develop new crop rotation schemes that
take into account the microbiological effects of various crops.
Keywords: crop rotation; 16S rDNA gene sequencing; soil microbiota; soil exhaustion; soil sequencing
1. Introduction
It is known that the continuous growth of a single crop leads to soil exhaustion and
fatigue. This effect includes plant growth retardation and low productivity, pest and disease
accumulation, and soil structure and nutrition degradation [1]. Crop rotation is one of the
most efﬁcient ways to prevent soil fatigue and increase the productivity of crops. Crop
rotation improves soil physical structure and aggregation, increases nutritional components
and diversity of soil microbiota and associated beneﬁcial microbes, and controls soilborne
pathogens by disrupting their natural life cycle [2].
The mechanism of these beneﬁcial changes is based on plant exudation and, in the
case of cover crops (i.e., crops that are not harvested and plowed into the soil), the biomass
of plants. The main components of plant exudates are carbohydrates, amino acids, and
organic acids [3]. This carbon intake leads to nutrition enrichment of the soil, which is the
most widespread and well-known effect of crop rotation. The meta-analysis of 122 reports
reveals that adding one or more crops in rotation to a monoculture increased total soil C by
Life 2023, 13, 400. https://doi.org/10.3390/life13020400
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/life
Life 2023, 13, 400
2 of 8
3.6% and total N by 5.3%. Moreover, when rotations include a cover crop, total C increases
by 8.5% and total N by 12.8% [4]. In the analysis of 11 maize crop rotation schemes in North
America, Bowels and co-authors showed that more diverse crop rotation leads to (i) yield
growth acceleration, (ii) increased yields under harsh conditions, and (iii) yield beneﬁts in
different growing conditions [5].
According to different studies, microbial diversity, enzymatic activities, and soil
respiration are generally higher in crop rotation systems than in monoculture or fallow [2].
Exact changes in microbial communities are highly speciﬁc and are determined by a range
of factors, including plant species, nutritional composition, and soil type [6]. For example,
in comparison of tomato crop rotation schemes (cabbage/tomato, kidney bean/tomato,
and celery/tomato), the celery/tomato scheme demonstrated the best performance [1].
Another trial with a partial addition of grassland in the crop scheme (no grassland; 50%
grassland; 75% grassland) found that forage production was higher in all crop rotation
schemes with grassland, but there were no beneﬁts for 75% of grassland sites [7]. Despite
all the positive information, not all crop rotation schemes are better than monoculture
cultivation. For example, Koyama and co-authors showed a decrease in yield in some crop
combinations (canola after alfalfa) [8]. A more wide-ranging meta-analysis also shows that
some crop diversiﬁcation strategies are more effective than others [9].
There is no unique formula for the best crop rotation. Alongside the whole range
of factors (soil, climate, economic circumstances), the main concerns are: (i) greater di-
versity of crops in time and space; (ii) alternation of crops with different rooting depths;
(iii) restoration of soil fertility; (iv) increasing the innate capacity of crops and soils to
suppress weeds, pests, and diseases and avoid soil fatigue; and (v) preventing soil erosion
and drought [10]. Most of the current crop rotation schemes were constructed according to
these recommendations.
Today, in addition to classic nitriﬁcation and chemical analysis, the researchers can
use another type of analysis—NGS sequencing. Multiple studies of crop rotations reveal
changes in either bacterial or fungal rhizosphere communities [1,2,11]. More hidden and
complicated changes in the bulk soil microbiota were also revealed [12].
Knowing the positive effects of different plants in rotation and how the microbial
community responds, the question arises: can we use NGS sequencing to predict an even
more effective crop rotation scheme? What are the predictors of a good scheme?
Kaplan and co-authors evaluate the relationship between phylogenetic distance
and crop performance. In their estimation of tomato production within a rotation with
35 different crops and weeds, they do not ﬁnd an effect of phylogenetic distance on crop
performance [13], although there were signiﬁcant changes in microbial communities.
In search of the most effective crop rotation scheme, we have to test multiple com-
binations of crops and plants over a long period of time. This takes a lot of time and
effort. For estimating the most effective plant combinations, prior short sub-experiments
are reasonable. Direct evaluation of crop productivity in this short experiment is difﬁcult.
Instead, the changes in the microbial community of the soil can be used as a strong marker
of changes in soil nutrition. Research on these changes is also novel due to the lack of
information about microbial changes in soils under different crop rotation schemes.
For the analysis, five widespread agricultural plants (legumes: vetch, clover, and cereals:
oats, wheat, and barley) were used. Initially, these five plants were grown in untreated soil.
After this, the soil from every plant was mixed and again seeded by the same five plants. After
a short vegetation period, the soil was sampled and stored. As a result, there were 25 samples
with all combinations of primary and secondary cultures. The microbial diversity of soil
samples was estimated using V4 16S rDNA gene sequencing. We calculate the crop rotation
effect based on the impact of plants on the entire soil microbial community and forecast good
crop rotation combinations for a large-scale crop rotation experiment.
Despite the advantages of 16S rDNA gene sequencing, this method has its own
limitations. In the future, whole genome sequencing or amplicone sequencing of functional
genes will be preferable.
Life 2023, 13, 400
3 of 8
2. Materials and Methods
Both the soil and the seeds for the experiment come from the Vologda region (western
Russia), which is one of the main crop harvesting centers. The sod-podzolic soil was
mixed, sieved, and air-dried; enriched with NPK fertilization mix (0.071 g NH4NO3, 0.02 g
K2HPO4, and 0.036 g KH2PO4 per pot); watered to 50% of its maximal moisture capacity;
and placed in 10 cm × 100 cm × 15 cm pots. Plant seeds (from real crop rotation schemes)
were disinfested in H2SO4 for 5–8 min.
For the analysis, ﬁve widespread agricultural plants (legumes: vetch, clover, and
cereals: oats, wheat, and barley) were used. These 5 plants were grown in 29 days (phase I).
After sampling, the soil from every plant was mixed individually, generating ﬁve unique
soils. Then, every unique soil was seeded again by the same 5 plants (6 repeats for every
plant). After a 22-day vegetation period (Phase II), the soil was sampled again. As a result,
there were 25 samples with combinations of ﬁve primary and ﬁve secondary cultures. For
reference samples (pots without seeds), the same treatment was used.
After every phase of the experiment, sampling was made: plants, roots, and debris
were removed from all soil in the pot, the bulk soil was mixed, and 2 g was sampled for the
microbial analysis.
Total soil DNA was isolated using the MN NucleoSpin Soil Kit (Macherey-Nagel,
Düren, Germany) using a Precellus 24 homogenizer (Bertin, Rockville, MD, USA). The
quality control of the isolation was carried out by PCR and agarose gel electrophoresis.
DNA sequencing using the V4 variable region of the 16S rRNA gene was performed on
an Illumina MiSeq sequencer (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), using the primers
515f (GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA) and 806r (GGACTACVSGGGTATCTAAT) [14]. Raw
reads are available on SRA (accession number PRJNA891634), or by a direct link: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/PRJNA891634 (accessed on 14 November 2022).
The general processing of sequences was carried out in R 4.2.0 (R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria), using the dada2 (v. 1.14.1) [15] and phyloseq
(v. 1.30.0) [16] packages, according to the authors’ recommendations. 16S rDNA gene
sequences were processed according to the DADA2 pipeline. Sequences were trimmed
for length (minimum 220 bp for forward reads and 180 bp for reverse reads) and quality
(no N; maximum error rates maxEE of 2 for both forward and reverse reads). ASVs were
determined according to the DADA2 algorithm, and chimera ASVs were removed by the
“consensus” method. Taxonomic annotation was performed by the naive Bayesian classiﬁer
(provided in the DADA2 package, default settings) with the SILVA 138 database [17] as the
training set, and chloroplast and mitochondrial reads were eliminated. The ﬁnal sequence
yield was from 10,779 to 26,577 reads per sample. The alpha-diversity calculation was
estimated using rarefaction to minimal depth (10,779).
The main alpha- and beta-diversity indices were calculated using ASVs and their
abundances using the phyloseq package. PERMANOVA was performed using the vegan
package [18].
3. Results
3.1. Phase I
The richness of ASVs in soil communities is presented in Figure 1A. The alpha-diversity
of the fallow soil microbiota is the lowest in the dataset (mean 2705 ASVs), while microbial
communities after the setting of soil legacies are more diverse. According to a one-way
ANOVA, the primary culture is a signiﬁcant factor (see Supplementary Table S1). Microbial
communities after barley are signiﬁcantly less diverse than those from other crops and
do not differ from fallow samples. The Simpson index (according to ANOVA) reveals no
differences between all samples.
Life 2023, 13, 400
4 of 8
 
Figure 1. Changes in the microbial community of soils in the first phase of the experiment (A): richness
of samples; (B): Bray-Curtis distance between.
According, to beta-diversity indices, microbial communities are similar. According to
PCoA ordination, the values of explained variance are less than 5% (Figure 1B). Despite this,
PERMANOVA reveals primary culture as a signiﬁcant factor (see Supplementary Table S2).
3.2. Phase II
The values of microbial richness are similar to those in Phase I (Figure 2). According to
a two-way ANOVA (fallow samples were excluded), primary culture and the combination
of primary and secondary cultures were signiﬁcant factors for Observed ASV index (see
Supplementary Table S3).
 
Figure 2. Richness of samples (according to the Observed ASVs Index, grouped by primary culture).
Beta-diversity was calculated using Bray-Curtis distances. According to PERMANOVA,
both primary and secondary cultures and their combination have a signiﬁcant effect (see
Supplementary Table S4). PCoA was used to ordinate the distances (Figure 3). As for phase
I, the values of explained variance by the ﬁrst and second axes are low, so for the clearance
of the effect we also use Ward’s diagram (Figure 4).
Life 2023, 13, 400
5 of 8
Figure 3. PCoA of Bray-Curtiss distances in soil microbial communities. Primary Culture—plant
type in phase I; Secondary Culture—plant type in phase II.
Figure 4. Cluster dendrogram (Ward’s clustering) of Bray-Curtiss distances in microbial communities
of soils.
4. Discussion
In phase I, there were moderate changes in the soil microbial community. According
to the richness of ASVs and ANOVA, microbial diversity in all crop soils (except barley) is
about 2920, while microbial diversity in fallow soil and bulk soil after barley is signiﬁcantly
less—2780. According to Bray-Curtis distances, microbial communities in all crop soils are
different, but this difference is small. Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest that microbial
communities in bulk soils of different crops are different, but the scale of their changes is
comparable to intergroup variances. This result is reasonable due to the short period of
cultivation. According to reports on the rhizosphere analysis of sorghum, the effect of plant
genotype is observed only after 35 days [19].
Despite moderate changes in phase I, the primary culture is signiﬁcant as a baseline
for the microbial communities of soils in phase II. According to variance analysis, primary
culture, and the combination of primary and secondary culture (but not the secondary
culture itself) were signiﬁcant factors for ASVs’ richness. All factors (primary and secondary
cultures and their combinations) were important in the PERMANOVA analysis of Bray-
Curtis distances.
Life 2023, 13, 400
6 of 8
The strength of both factors (primary and secondary cultures) is ambiguous. The vari-
ance analysis allows us to determine primary culture as a signiﬁcant factor for both alpha
(richness in phase II) and beta (Bray distances) diversities. But the percent of explained
variability for the PCoA plot is very low. This effect can be explained both by a short period
of experimentation (20–30 days for each phase) and bulk soil sampling. As it was men-
tioned earlier, the main effect of crop rotation is connected with the rhizosphere microbial
community, not the bulk soil one. Changes in the bulk soil microbial community have to be
moderate. For example, in the long-term analysis of ﬁeld grassland crop rotation systems,
the changes in microbial soil diversity were signiﬁcant but relatively weak [7]. In the
comparison of wheat monoculture and pea-wheat crop rotation (two years of experiment),
there was no difference in alpha-diversity and a moderate difference in beta-diversity and
taxonomic composition [2]. Therefore, the changes in the microbial community of the bulk
soil during crop rotation are moderate, even in long-term experiments. Both studies found
signiﬁcant variation in fungal communities, particularly arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal
(AMF) communities [2,7].
Even in this relatively short experiment, it is possible to find the significant influence
of different crop rotation schemes on the microbial composition of soils. The influence of
cultures on soil microbiota is variable. Growing legume plants as the second culture results
in a higher beta-distance between samples than for the cereal ones (Figure 4). Vetch has
the greatest impact on microbial composition in this legume group. In the dendrogram of
Bray-Curtis distances (Figure 3), all vetch samples (both for primary and secondary culture)
are located in separate clusters. One of the possible reasons is the alteration of soil nitrogen
metabolism, even in non-cover crop rotation. This mechanism was previously shown as
a beneficial element in a rice-based crop rotation system in China [20]. In contrast, cereal
plants—the barley and the wheat—have no significant effect on soil composition. Presumably,
the oat has the strongest effect (Figure 3), but this suggestion needs additional research.
Another point of the experiment was connected with the effects of continuous growth
of the same plant. Due to the short period of growth, the exhaustion of the soil cannot
be revealed. Furthermore, the microbial communities of vetch after vetch soils differ
signiﬁcantly from others, according to Bray-Curtis distances. These changes do not include
any speciﬁc taxonomic shifts or changes in alpha-diversity. The soil microbiota of clover
after clover showed a similar but less pronounced effect. Both shifts can be connected with
the alteration of nitrogen metabolism.
Even a short period of plant growth allows us to determine changes in the microbial
composition of soils. These changes are moderate and masked by high intergroup variance,
but there is a clear effect of using legumes in crop rotation schemes. For clariﬁcation of
this effect, it is required to set up the following experiments: (i) comparison of legumes,
legumes and cereals, and cereal crop rotation schemes; (ii) analysis of both the microbial
and fungal communities.
5. Conclusions
Short-term experiments (20 to 40 days) allow for the discovery of microbial shifts
even in bulk soil from different plants. In the ﬁrst phase, the microbial communities of
soils from all plants except barley are close. The alpha diversity of microbial communities
in soils from any plant, except barley, is higher than the one from reference fallow soil.
For the whole experiment, both primary and secondary cultures are signiﬁcant factors
for the microbial composition of microbial soil communities. Despite this, the strength of
those factors is limited. In our study, vetch showed the strongest effect on the microbial
composition of soil, especially continuously growing vetch. According to beta-diversity,
growing clover also leads to changes in soil microbiota. The inﬂuence of other cultures is
moderate and, as a rule, does not exceed the intergroup variation.
Life 2023, 13, 400
7 of 8
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/life13020400/s1. Table S1. Connection between microbial richness
(Observed ASVs) and plant culture, phase I ANOVA results. Table S2. Relationship between Bray-
Curtis distances and plant culture, phase I PERMANOVA results. Table S3. Connection between
microbial richness (Observed ASVs) and the culture of plants, phase II. ANOVA results. Table S4.
The relationship between Bray-Curtis distances and plant culture, phase II PERMANOVA results.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, O.V.O., O.P.O. and E.E.A.; methodology, O.N.K., O.V.O.
and O.P.O.; software, A.O.Z.; formal analysis, A.O.Z.; investigation, O.N.K., O.V.O. and O.P.O.; re-
sources, A.A.K., A.G.P. and E.E.A.; data curation, A.O.Z.; writing—original draft preparation, A.O.Z.;
writing—review and editing, A.O.Z., A.V.E., A.N.N. and E.E.A.; visualization, A.O.Z.; supervision,
E.E.A.; project administration, E.E.A.; funding acquisition, A.G.P. and E.E.A. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The article was made with the support of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of
the Russian Federation in accordance with agreement №075-15-2020-920, dated 16 November 2020,
on providing a grant in the form of subsidies from the Federal budget of the Russian Federation. The
grant was provided for state support for the creation and development of a world-class scientiﬁc
center, “Agrotechnologies for the Future”.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Raw reads are available on SRA (accession number PRJNA891634) or
by a direct link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/PRJNA891634 (accessed on 14 November 2022).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Jin, L.; Lyu, J.; Jin, N.; Xie, J.; Wu, Y.; Zhang, G.; Feng, Z.; Tang, Z.; Liu, Z.; Luo, S.; et al. Effects of Different Vegetable Rotations on the
Rhizosphere Bacterial Community and Tomato Growth in a Continuous Tomato Cropping Substrate. PLoS ONE 2021, 16, e0257432.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Woo, S.; De Filippis, F.; Zotti, M.; Vandenberg, A.; Hucl, P.; Bonanomi, G. Pea-Wheat Rotation Affects Soil Microbiota Diversity,
Community Structure, and Soilborne Pathogens. Microorganisms 2022, 10, 370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Vives-Peris, V.; de Ollas Valverde, C.; Gómez-Cadenas, A.; Perez-Clemente, R. Root Exudates: From Plant to Rhizosphere and
Beyond. Plant Cell Rep. 2020, 39, 3–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Mcdaniel, M.; Tiemann, L.; Grandy, S. Does Agricultural Crop Diversity Enhance Soil Microbial Biomass and Organic Matter
Dynamics? A Meta-Analysis. Ecol. Appl. 2013, 24, 560–570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Bowles, T.; Mooshammer, M.; Socolar, Y.; Calderon, F.; Cavigelli, M.; Culman, S.; Deen, W.; Drury, C.; Garcia y Garcia, A.; Gaudin,
A.; et al. Long-Term Evidence Shows That Crop-Rotation Diversiﬁcation Increases Agricultural Resilience to Adverse Growing
Conditions in North America. One Earth 2020, 2, 284–293. [CrossRef]
6.
Zverev, A.; Zverev, A.O.; Kichko, A.A.; Pinaev, A.G.; Provorov, N.A.; Andronov, E.E. Diversity Indices of Plant Communities and
Their Rhizosphere Microbiomes: An Attempt to Find the Connection. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 2339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Hoeffner, K.; Beylich, A.; Chabbi, A.; Cluzeau, D.; Dascalu, D.; Graefe, U.; Guzmán, G.; Hallaire, V.; Hanisch, J.; Landa, B.; et al.
Legacy Effects of Temporary Grassland in Annual Crop Rotation on Soil Ecosystem Services. Sci. Total Environ. 2021, 780, 146140.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Koyama, A.; Dias, T.; Antunes, P. Application of Plant–Soil Feedbacks in the Selection of Crop Rotation Sequences. Ecol. Appl.
2021, 32, e2501. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Beillouin, D.; Ben Ari, T.; Malézieux, E.; Seufert, V.; Makowski, D. Positive but Variable Effects of Crop Diversiﬁcation on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Glob. Chang. Biol. 2021, 27, 4697–4710. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Boincean, B.; Dent, D. Crop Rotation. In Farming the Black Earth, Sustainable and Climate-Smart Management of Chernozem Soils;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 89–124. ISBN 978-3-030-22532-2.
11.
Benitez, M.-S.; Osborne, S.; Lehman, R. Previous Crop and Rotation History Effects on Maize Seedling Health and Associated
Rhizosphere Microbiome. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 15709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Hilton, S.; Bennett, A.; Chandler, D.; Mills, P.; Bending, G. Preceding Crop and Seasonal Effects Inﬂuence Fungal, Bacterial and
Nematode Diversity in Wheat and Oilseed Rape Rhizosphere and Soil. Appl. Soil Ecol. 2018, 126, 34–46. [CrossRef]
13.
Kaplan, I.; Bokulich, N.; Caporaso, J.; Enders, L.; Ghanem, W.; Ingerslew, K. Phylogenetic Farming: Can Evolutionary History
Predict Crop Rotation via the Soil Microbiome? Evol. Appl. 2020, 13, 1984–1999. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Life 2023, 13, 400
8 of 8
14.
Caporaso, J.; Lauber, C.; Walters, W.; Berg-Lyons, D.; Lozupone, C.; Turnbaugh, P.; Fierer, N.; Knight, R. Global Patterns of 16S
RRNA Diversity at a Depth of Millions of Sequences per Sample. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108 (Suppl. S1), 4516–4522.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Callahan, B.; Mcmurdie, P.; Rosen, M.; Han, A.; Johnson, A.J.; Holmes, S. DADA2: High-Resolution Sample Inference from
Illumina Amplicon Data. Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 581–583. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Mcmurdie, P.; Holmes, S. Phyloseq: An R Package for Reproducible Interactive Analysis and Graphics of Microbiome Census
Data. PloS ONE 2013, 8, e61217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Quast, C.; Pruesse, E.; Yilmaz, P.; Gerken, J.; Schweer, T.; Yarza, P.; Peplies, J.; Glöckner, F. The SILVA Ribosomal RNA Gene
Database Project: Improved Data Processing and Web-Based Tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013, 41, D590–D596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Oksanen, J.; Blanchet, F.G.; Kindt, R.; Legendre, P.; Minchin, P.; O’Hara, B.; Simpson, G.; Solymos, P.; Stevens, H.; Wagner, H.
Vegan: Community Ecology Package, R Package Version 2.2-1; R Foundation for Statistical Computing: Vienna, Austria, 2015.
Available online: https://cran.r-project.org/package=vegan(accessed on 14 November 2022).
19.
Oberholster, T.; Vikram, S.; Cowan, D.; Valverde, A. Key Microbial Taxa in the Rhizosphere of Sorghum and Sunﬂower Grown in
Crop Rotation. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 624, 530–539. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Xie, Z.; He, Y.; Tu, M.; Xu, C.; Liu, G.; Wang, H.; Cao, W.; Liu, H. Chinese Milk Vetch Improves Plant Growth, Development and N
Recovery in the Rice-Based Rotation System of South China. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 3577. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
