 
Optimal Crop Rotation based on Soil Composition
Nithyashree Chandrashekar 
MBA-Tech Computer Science 
MPSTME NMIMS 
Mumbai, India 
nithya.shree01@nmims.edu.in 
Tanmay Shende 
MBA-Tech Computer Science 
MPSTME NMIMS 
Mumbai, India 
tanmay.shende77@nmims.edu.in
Rathin Nair 
MBA-Tech Computer Science 
MPSTME NMIMS 
Mumbai, India 
rathin.nair39@nmims.edu.in 
Avani Bhuva 
Computer Science 
MPSTME NMIMS 
Mumbai, India 
avani.bhuva@nmims.edu
Sanskriti Sharma 
MBA-Tech Computer Science 
MPSTME NMIMS 
Mumbai, India 
sanskriti.sharma75@nmims.edu.in 
Abstract— The agricultural sector has proven to be a critical 
sector for India since the early times. Even during recent years, we 
have seen that the agricultural sector provides employment to 
approximately 60 percent of the rural population. It has also 
contributed as significantly as 20 percent to the Indian GDP in the 
year 2020-2021. These reasons along with the fact that India has 
the largest quantity of agricultural land prove that the agriculture 
sector is one of the most essential sectors in India. Hence, we must 
ensure that the agricultural practices being employed, and the 
tools being used are up-to-date and that there is efficient use of 
arable land. 
In this paper, we reviewed various machine learning 
algorithms such as Artificial neural network, Random Forest, 
K-means clustering, K Nearest Neighbor (K-NN), Support 
vector machine, Neural Network, Decision Tree, Bayesian 
network etc. studied by various researchers to analyze the 
implementation with highest precision. In order to determine 
the most crucial parameters to take into account for the 
optimal decision, we also examined a variety of datasets and 
parameters considered by researchers for various algorithms. 
The aim is to determine the most suitable algorithm to help the 
farmers increase their crop yield, maintain soil nutrition, and 
gain more profits even during the off season. Hence, we test 
various algorithms on the dataset containing the most 
important parameters in order to determine the ideal crop. 
Keywords— Machine learning, crop, yield, soil, nutrients, 
agriculture, crop rotation, fertilizer, KNN, Decision Tree, 
Random Forest, SVM, Neural networks, N, P, K. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Agricultural sector is one of the most important sectors of 
occupation in India. It contributes greatly to employment, 
and to the GDP of the nation. Agriculture has also been a 
major contributor to the exports business. The agricultural 
sector also directly and indirectly supports various other 
sectors making it a critical part of the Indian economy. 
Hence, we must ensure that the agricultural sector performs 
as efficiently and effectively as possible with the resources 
given at hand. Various people have contributed to the 
research in this direction by introducing better irrigation 
systems, making artificial sunlight, etc. One such way of 
boosting the output of the agricultural sector is promoting 
Optimal Crop Rotation. 
Crop Rotation is typically the practice of farming a pair 
of crops alternatively that help sustain the fertility of the soil 
and make sure that the land doesn’t sit idle during off-
season. It significantly improves the farmer’s income and 
also makes sure that his land remains fertile for the 
upcoming crop. But due to lack of knowledge and 
understanding of the soil, many farmers make the wrong 
decisions regarding the pair of crops to be grown. This 
makes their land lose its fertility and become useless over 
time thus demanding fertilizers in a greater quantity. 
Hence it is of utmost importance that the crops selected by 
farmers are suitable to the soil to increase the yield and the 
profits of the farmer. 
Crop selection for the soil can rely on diverse elements 
such as the temperature, pH level, levels of NPK and the 
amount of organic carbon content, etc. These factors must 
be taken into account according to their level of impact 
while making the decision of the ideal crop. There has 
been significant research on this front by many 
researchers. Our aim in this paper is to understand the 
work done by these researchers and to understand how 
they have selected the factors most critical for choosing 
the ideal crop. We also look at the various gaps and 
understand the scope of improvement in their research.
In the following sections we present our research on 
the current landscape of the agricultural situation in regard to 
crop rotation and measure of yield; and how the scientist 
and researchers have tackled the issues concerning the 
same. We also see the various algorithms and techniques 
used by researchers to solve the problem of crop selection 
and the accuracy for each algorithm/ technique used.
We see that though there are various methods and 
techniques that have been employed, the problem solution 
is still not structures. One reason for this is the variety of 
datasets and sets of parameters being used. 
The sections in the paper are as follows: The second 
section comprises of the literature survey done regarding 
the topic of crop rotation and crop yield prediction. The 
third section lists the methodology and implementation 
employed by us to determine the ideal crop based on all
important environmental factors. The final section 
includes the discussion and the conclusion regarding the 
same.
II.
LITERATURE SURVEY
[1]tested various machine learning algorithms such as 
Recursive Feature Elimination, Classifier, k nearest 
neighbor, Decision Tree, Random Forest and so on to predict 
which crop should be grown in a particular soil under certain 
environmental conditions using features such as soil pH, 
carbon, nitrogen, rainfall and temperature. The Recursive 
Feature Elimination resulted in the highest accuracy. 
2023 International Conference on Integration of Computational Intelligent Systems (ICICIS) 
Pune, India. Nov 1-4, 2023
979-8-3503-1878-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
1
2023 International Conference on Integration of Computational Intelligent System (ICICIS) | 979-8-3503-1878-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICICIS56802.2023.10430231
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:44:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[2]conducted a survey to understand how different 
analytical techniques such as Decision Tree, Random Forest, 
Bayesian network, Artificial neural network, Support vector 
machine, K-means clustering, expectation maximization 
algorithm, DBSCAN, Apriori algorithm can be used to 
forecast yield of a crop using various agrarian factors such as 
soil fertility, crop availability, climate, pests and crop 
diseases. 
[3]aims to achieve two main goals: selecting the ideal 
crop to plant in the next crop rotation and adjusting the 
irrigation system of the land with attentive irrigation. 
Throughout the monitoring phase, data on the field's soil 
properties, including soil temperature, moisture, and air 
temperature, were gathered. A wireless sensor network 
(WSN) was developed to collect this information and deliver 
insight through sporadic cloud uploading. Long Short-Term 
Memory (LSTM) networks have been shown to be the 
efficient technique. 
[4]advocated the use of predictive analysis to estimate 
agricultural output based on soil variety, soil ionic strength, 
amount of chemical used, area of crop seeded, and crop yield 
in tones. K-NN, Naive Bayes, Random Forest, and Bayes 
Net were among the several methods used, with Random 
Forest having the greatest accuracy.
[5]presented data mining methods like K-Nearest 
Neighbor and Naive Bayes to assess soil activity and 
categorize it depending on how nutrient-rich the soil would 
be for crop production, hence predicting crop output. 
[6]developed a machine learning algorithm using neuro-
fuzzy logic implemented in MATLAB by detecting the 
concentrations of urea, potassium, magnesium, pH, and 
nitrogen. This work assisted farmers in maximizing their 
yield by predicting suitable crops for cultivation as well as 
crop rotation. 
[7]suggested 
using 
Multiobjective 
Evolutionary 
Algorithms (MOEA) to solve a multi-objective optimization 
problem while taking various areas and goals into 
consideration. The goals are to reduce overall input costs, 
increase soil nutrient retention, increase economic return, 
reduce economic risk, and encourage product variegation in
consecutive growing seasons. 
[8]proposed AgroConsultant, an intelligent system built 
on the mix of big data analytics and machine learning 
methods like Decision Tree, K Nearest Neighbor (K-NN), 
Random Forest, and Neural Network, was suggested by the 
study. This research seeks to help Indian farmers choose the 
best produce to cultivate based on the weather, location, soil 
traits, season, and temperature. 
[9]developed the system using machine learning methods 
like KNN, Ensemble-based Models, Neural networks, 
Decision Trees for harvest forecast, and SVM for rainfall 
prediction with the intention of helping farmers. Based on 
soil characteristics and weather conditions, aiming at 
betterment of farmers. The system also offers information on 
the type and amount of fertilizers that are necessary, as well 
as the seedlings that must be planted. By doing this job, 
producers can boost their profit margins and prevent land 
pollution. 
[10]recommended 
appropriate 
crops 
taking 
soil 
conditions into consideration using a variety of machine 
learning algorithms, including KNN, Gaussian support 
vector machine (SVM), and bragged tree. Data from their 
system was used to control the application of artificial 
fertilizers and prepare the area for the following planting. 
[11]gathered data related to the crops' seed, including 
temperature, humidity, and moisture content to facilitate 
successful crop growth. Along with the software, a mobile 
application for Android is also being created. The application 
allows users to input parameters such as temperature, and 
their location is automatically determined, initiating the 
prediction process. This process is based on supervised 
learning, Naive Bayes, and Gaussian Naive Bayes, resulting 
in an accuracy rate of 97%. 
[12]concentrated on the pragmatic implementation of 
several machine learning algorithms and their quantification. 
The findings indicate that Random Forest and XG boost are 
the most accurate. Furthermore, the research considers the 
variability in data from rainfall, season, area, and 
temperature datasets to identify a consistent pattern. 
[13]identified KNN classifier and decision tree as 
potential machine learning algorithms. The aim was to 
incorporate additional attributes into the system and refine 
the results, leading to improved yields and the identification 
of various patterns for forecasts. This system is valuable in 
identifying which crops are suitable for specific regions. The 
parameters taken into consideration include soil type and pH 
level, humidity, temperature, wind, and rainfall. 
[14]proposed a new approach called Crop Selection 
Method (CSM) to maximize the net yield rate of crops 
throughout the season. The development of the CSM 
involved considering various machine learning techniques, 
including ANN, SVM, KNN, Decision Tree Learning, 
Random Forest, Gradient Boosted Decision Tree, and 
Regularized Greedy Forest. The crop production rate is 
dependent on various factors, such as the region's geography, 
weather conditions, soil type, soil composition, and 
harvesting methods. 
[15]devised Majority voting technique in order to 
determine what crop is best suited for precision agriculture 
which is the ultimate goal for the author as well as the 
farmers. The algorithms used for Majority Voting techniques 
are Random tree, CHAID, K-Nearest neighbor and Naïve 
bayes, algorithms to accurately determine the class under 
which each case of soil condition falls. Their efforts will aid 
farmers in planting the appropriate seed depending on soil 
needs to boost national output. 
[16]worked 
at 
quantifying 
and 
emphasizing 
the 
importance of Potassium in the agricultural yield of the 
spices in India. The authors conducted various tests in order 
to find out the requirements of various spices in terms of the 
NPK nutrients and the recommended level of these nutrients 
in order to successfully cultivate these spices. Along with 
this the authors studied the amount of Potassium, Nitrogen 
and Phosphorus present in organic and inorganic fertilizers. 
The results from their work showed potassium sulfate were 
better sources for pepper, and potassium chloride accounts 
for 98% of potassium applied for spice crops. 
[17]used k- means clustering in order to classify the soils 
in various districts based on environmental factors, biotic 
2
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:44:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
inputs, the area for cultivation and the individual yield of 
crops. The use of data mining methods to agricultural data is 
the primary area of research in order to predict crop yields 
for important cereal crops in important areas of Bangladesh. 
[18]developed a model based on data generated for crop 
rotation in the region of Muzaffarnagar. The authors used the 
Stochastic Optimization Function to determine the most 
suitable crop rotation based on factors like Temperature, pH, 
NPK and EC, etc. The parameters were weighted to 
determine the most suitable crop rotation pair more 
accurately. 
III.
IMPLEMENTATION
A. Proposed Architecture 
In order to solve the existing drawbacks, we propose a 
new architecture considering the difficulties faced in the 
previous research papers. We have considered the parameters 
that have been shown to have maximum impact on the 
fertility of soil and hence in determining the ideal crop. The 
collection of data is brought into a consistent state by 
transforming the qualities utilized in it into a certain range, 
preventing anomalies. 
The data is standardized using normalization, and any 
missing values are deleted. As the dataset is formatted, 
redundancy is reduced, which also makes the data more 
effective for processing predictions. Furthermore, we have 
conducted various pre-processing in order to better 
understand the influence of these parameters on the soil. 
Based on the previous information we perform the processes 
of feature extraction and feature selection in order to 
optimize our dataset by dropping unnecessary parameters. 
We then split the dataset into training and testing in the 
ratio 70:30. Next we train various models using the 
algorithms listed and the training dataset and quantify the 
results of the same for comparison. We select the best 
models   based on previous comparisons and train our model 
to achieve higher accuracy. The trained model is then applied 
to the testing dataset to predict the ideal crop for any given 
values of the parameters. After evaluating the performance of 
the model, we then trained it to achieve further accuracy on 
the test data. Finally, we incorporate the values from real 
world data to give accurate and quick predictions that allow 
the users to make informed decisions regarding their land. 
B. Data Collection and Description 
The realization of our literature survey showed us that the 
reason for the existing inaccuracy of the current models was 
associated with the absence of consolidation of a few critical 
parameters. Further research revealed additional crucial 
parameters were soil salinity, Carbon content of soil and 
altitude. We referred the dataset [19] provided on Kaggle for 
the values of N, P, K, temperature, humidity, pH and rainfall. 
Additionally, we built the dataset for remaining parameters 
by augmenting the data available for the target crops. 
The dataset encompasses a variety of crops, including
grapes, muskmelon, pomegranate, watermelon,
mango, 
orange, chickpea, lentil, mothbeans, mungbean, rice, cotton, 
kidney beans, apple, coffee, blackgram, banana, jute, pigeon 
peas, papaya, coconut, maize. Further information about our 
data is given in table 1.
Fig. 1. Proposed Architecture 
TABLE I.
DATA DESCRIPTION
Parameter
Description
Unit
N
Soil's Nitrogen concentration
mg/kg
P
Soil's Phosphorus concentration 
mg/kg
K
Soil's Potassium concentration
mg/L
C
Organic Carbon concentration in
the soil
%
pH
pH value of the soil
pH scale
Humidity
Relative atmospherichumidity of
region
%
Temperature
Temperature of the
atmosphere in the region
Degree Celsius
Altitude
Altitude of the region
m
Rainfall
Rainfall in the region
mm
C. Training 
After acquiring the dataset, we use the Logistic 
Regression, Random Forest, Decision tree and Naive Bayes 
Algorithms to train the model on the training data. This is 
done for selecting the model that optimally predicts the ideal 
crop. We then quantify the result of the trained models based 
on accuracy and select the best models. 
x
Logistic Regression: An instance of supervised 
learning is demonstrated here, aiming to predict the 
probability of a binary (yes/no) event. Logistic 
Regression is the chosen method for handling 
classification problems when dealing with a binary 
or categorical dependent variable. There are certain 
assumptions to consider while utilizing logistic 
regression, including the different types of logistic 
regression, 
independent 
variables, 
and 
the 
availability of training data.
x
Random Forest: In the realm of classification and 
regression 
challenges, 
a 
frequently 
utilized 
supervised machine learning algorithm is the 
decision tree. This method constructs decision trees 
using diverse samples and leverages the majority 
vote for classification and the average for regression.
The Random Forest Algorithm's primary advantage 
is its ability to handle both continuous and 
categorical variables in datasets, making it suitable 
3
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:44:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
for both regression and classification tasks. It 
performs better than other algorithms for these kinds 
of tasks. 
x
Decision Tree: Supervised learning technique that 
employs a tree structure to represent class labels and 
attribute representations. In this approach, the 
attribute of the record is compared to the root 
attribute, and based on the comparison's outcome, 
the algorithm moves to a new node. This process 
continues until a leaf node with a predicted class 
value is reached. Therefore, a decision tree model is 
highly effective in making predictions. 
x
Naive bayes: It is a supervised learning technique 
that creates a model of the class label distribution 
using a specific description of the target attribute. 
The naive Bayes method is based on applying Bayes' 
theorem and assumes independence between each 
pair of attributes. The Naive Bayes classifier reduces 
the complexity of the Bayesian classifier technique 
by assuming conditional dependency across the 
training set. 
The results of the various algorithms are shown  in the 
table. 
TABLE II.
TRAINING ACCURACY 
Algorithm
Accuracy
Accuracy (%)
Decision Tree
0.8649350649350649
86%
Logistic Regression
0.8057142857142857
80%
Random Forest
0.8331168831168831
83%
Naive Bayes
1.0
100%
D. Testing and Results 
Based on the accuracy of the algorithms on training data 
shown in the previous section we selected Decision Tree and 
Random Forest as the algorithms for our crop predictor 
model. We then moved on to the final phase of testing, 
where we applied both the trained models on the testing data 
created earlier. We then evaluated the performance of both 
models based on the confusion matrix as well as the 
performance metrics such as precision, recall, kappa, f1 
score, accuracy. 22*30 
The confusion matrix for the decision tree algorithm 
indicates that the diagonal elements are the correctly 
predicted samples. There are 563 such samples which are 
rightly predicted. There are a few samples, especially in 
classes 10, 18 and 20 that need to be trained more. The 
overall testing accuracy of the model that uses Decision Tree 
is 85.45%. 
The confusion matrix for the Random Forest algorithm 
indicates that 529 samples are rightly predicted. There are a 
few samples, especially in classes 19 and 2, that need to be 
trained more. The overall testing accuracy of the model that 
uses Random Forest is 80.15%. 
Fig. 2. Confusion Matrix for Decision Tree 
Fig. 3. Precision, recall, f1-score & support for Decision Tree 
Fig. 4. Confusion Matrix for Random Forest 
4
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:44:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 5. Precision, recall, f1-score & support for Random Forest 
IV.
CONCLUSION
Machine learning models provide a considerable amount 
of scope to investigate the vast amounts of data, analyze the 
information obtained, and provide deeper understanding of 
the process Agriculture depends heavily on crop cultivation 
forecasts, with farmers eager to determine how much they 
may 
reasonably 
anticipate 
producing. 
Agricultural 
predictions in the past were based on farmers' fundamental 
knowledge of the crops that should be grown on plots of 
land. Considering the huge number of variable factors that 
can affect the growth of a particular crop and the impact of 
that crop on the soil, farmers might not be able to make very 
accurate predictions or take decisions based on the same. 
Using technologies like machine learning, we can get highly 
accurate results which can help farmers take informed 
decisions. Various tools are employed to create models that 
describe how various factors and activities interact. This 
makes it possible to predict potential responses to a particular 
scenario in the future. 
The most often utilized algorithms are Decision Tree, K 
Nearest Neighbor KNN, Random Forest, Artificial Neural 
Networks, and Naive Bayes. Some studies have also 
employed feature selection to lessen the processing load on 
the algorithms and give users a more accurate answer in less 
time by removing redundant or unneeded components. Most 
of the publications that were examined considered variables 
like temperature, PH, NPK, moisture, rainfall, and so forth. 
In our work we have successfully gathered data for 
various environmental parameters like N, P, K, C, pH, 
Humidity, Temperature, Altitude, Rainfall which play a vital 
role in determining the suitable crop. We also implemented 4 
models before concluding that Decision tree model gives the 
best results for the given set of parameters.  
V.
FUTURE WORK 
The implemented system demonstrates the ability to 
suggest suitable crops based on environmental factors. 
However, there are certain gaps that need to be addressed. 
Present model can be modified by incorporating other crucial 
attributes such as crop demand and supply, farm harvest 
prices, and market price as economic indicators. The 
multifaceted prediction will give farmers a ground level 
understanding of the best crops to cultivate by taking into 
account not only environmental and geographical elements 
but also economic aspects.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Prof. Avni Bhuva for her 
continued support and encouragement. We express our 
sincere appreciation for her generous contribution and 
guidance. We would also like to thank our college Mukesh 
Patel School of Technology Management and Engineering 
for enabling us to complete this research paper.
REFERENCES
[1] 
A. Suruliandi, G. Mariammal, and S. P. Raja, “Crop prediction 
based on soil and environmental characteristics using feature 
selection techniques,” Math Comput Model Dyn Syst, vol. 27, no. 1, 
pp. 117–140, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1080/13873954.2021.1882505.
[2] 
D. Elavarasan, D. R. Vincent, V. Sharma, A. Y. Zomaya, and K. 
Srinivasan, “Forecasting yield by integrating agrarian factors and 
machine learning models: A survey,” Comput Electron Agric, vol. 
155, 
pp. 
257–282, 
2018, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.10.024. 
[3] 
S. A. M. Varman, A. R. Baskaran, S. Aravindh, and E. Prabhu, 
“Deep Learning and IoT for Smart Agriculture Using WSN,” in
2017 IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence 
and 
Computing 
Research 
(ICCIC), 
2017, 
pp. 
1–6. 
doi: 
10.1109/ICCIC.2017.8524140. 
[4] 
M. Chandraprabha and R. K. Dhanaraj, “Soil Based Prediction for 
Crop Yield using Predictive Analytics,” in 2021 3rd International 
Conference on Advances in Computing, Communication Control 
and 
Networking 
(ICAC3N), 
2021, 
pp. 
265–270. 
doi: 
10.1109/ICAC3N53548.2021.9725758. 
[5] 
M. Paul, S. K. Vishwakarma, and A. Verma, “Analysis of Soil 
Behaviour and Prediction of Crop Yield Using Data Mining 
Approach,” in 2015 International Conference on Computational 
Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN), 2015, pp. 766–
771. doi: 10.1109/CICN.2015.156. 
[6] 
E. E. Vigneswaran and M. Selvaganesh, “Decision Support System 
for Crop Rotation Using Machine Learning,” in 2020 Fourth 
International Conference on Inventive Systems and Control (ICISC),
2020, pp. 925–930. doi: 10.1109/ICISC47916.2020.9171120. 
[7] 
R. Pavón, R. Brunelli, and C. von Lücken, “Determining Optimal 
Crop Rotations by Using Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithms,” 
in Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information and Engineering 
Systems, J. D. Velásquez, S. A. Ríos, R. J. Howlett, and L. C. Jain, 
Eds., Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 
147–154.
[8] 
Z. Doshi, S. Nadkarni, R. Agrawal, and N. Shah, “AgroConsultant: 
Intelligent Crop Recommendation System Using Machine Learning 
Algorithms,” in 2018 Fourth International Conference on 
Computing Communication Control and Automation (ICCUBEA),
2018, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICCUBEA.2018.8697349. 
[9] 
M. N, “Crop Prediction using Machine Learning Approaches,” 
International Journal of Engineering Research and, vol. V9, Aug. 
2020, doi: 10.17577/IJERTV9IS080029. 
[10] 
R. S. L. S. T. A. G. N. M.S. Roobini, “Crop suggestions using 
machine learning based on soil conditions,” nveo, vol. 8, no. 5, 
2021.
[11] 
M. Kalimuthu, P. Vaishnavi, and M. Kishore, “Crop Prediction 
using Machine Learning,” in 2020 Third International Conference 
on Smart Systems and Inventive Technology (ICSSIT), 2020, pp. 
926–932. doi: 10.1109/ICSSIT48917.2020.9214190. 
[12] 
A. Nigam, S. Garg, A. Agrawal, and P. Agrawal, “Crop Yield 
Prediction Using Machine Learning Algorithms,” in 2019 Fifth 
International Conference on Image Information Processing (ICIIP),
2019, pp. 125–130. doi: 10.1109/ICIIP47207.2019.8985951. 
[13] 
V. P. Prof. S. K. Pavan Patil, “Crop Prediction System using 
Machine Learning Algorithms,” International Research Journal of 
Engineering and Technology (IRJET), vol. 7, no. 2, 2020. 
[14] 
R. Kumar, M. P. Singh, P. Kumar, and J. P. Singh, “Crop Selection 
Method to maximize crop yield rate using machine learning 
technique,” 
in 
2015 
International 
Conference 
on 
Smart 
5
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:44:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Technologies and Management for Computing, Communication, 
Controls, Energy and Materials (ICSTM), 2015, pp. 138–145. doi: 
10.1109/ICSTM.2015.7225403. 
[15] 
A. R. Dasari, B. Dadore, and A. Watekar, “Crop Recommendation 
System to Maximize Crop Yield in Ramtek region using Machine 
Learning,” Int J Sci Res Sci Technol, pp. 485–489, Feb. 2019, doi: 
10.32628/IJSRST196172. 
[16] 
K. V. P. A. S. H. A.K. SADANANDAN, “Role of Potassium 
Nutrition in Improving Yield and Quality of Spice Crops in India,” 
International Potash Institute, 2001. 
[17] 
A. T. M. S. Ahamed et al., “Applying data mining techniques to 
predict annual yield of major crops and recommend planting 
different crops in different districts in Bangladesh,” in 2015 
IEEE/ACIS 16th International Conference on Software Engineering, 
Artificial 
Intelligence, 
Networking 
and 
Parallel/Distributed 
Computing 
(SNPD), 
2015, 
pp. 
1–6. 
doi: 
10.1109/SNPD.2015.7176185. 
[18] 
S. Aggarwal, R. Srinivas, H. Puppala, and J. Magner, “Integrated 
decision support for promoting crop rotation based sustainable 
agricultural management using geoinformatics and stochastic 
optimization,” Comput Electron Agric, vol. 200, p. 107213, 2022, 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2022.107213. 
[19] 
A. Ingle, “Crop Recommendation Dataset,” Kaggle. Accessed: Feb. 
28, 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/atharvaingle/crop-
recommendation-dataset/data 
6
Authorized licensed use limited to: BMS Institute of Technology. Downloaded on October 31,2025 at 08:44:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
